<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X: The Trial</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Trial</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>To fathom the mind of the Woman of Gratz is no easy task, and one not to be lightly undertaken. Remembering her obscure beginning, the bare-legged child drinking in revolutionary talk in the Transylvanian kitchen, and the development of her intellect along unconventional linesвҒ вҖ”remembering, also, that early in life she made acquaintance with the extreme problems of life and death in their least attractive forms, and that the proportion of things had been grossly distorted by her teachers, you may arrive at a point where your vacillating judgment hesitates between blame and pity.</p>
			<p>I would believe that the power of introspection had no real place in her mental equipment, else how can we explain her attitude towards the man whom she had once defied and reconcile those outbursts of hers, wherein she called for his death, for his terrible punishment, wherein, too, she allowed herself the rare luxury of unrestrained speech, how can we reconcile these tantrums with the fact that this manвҖҷs voice filled her thoughts day and night, the recollection of this manвҖҷs eyes through his mask followed her every movement, till the image of him became an obsession?</p>
			<p>It may be that I have no knowledge of women and their ways (there is no subtle smugness in the doubt I express) and that her inconsistency was general to her sex. It must not be imagined that she had spared either trouble or money to secure the extermination of her enemies, and the enemies of the Red Hundred. She had described them, as well as she could, after her first meeting, and the sketches made under her instruction had been circulated by the officers of the Reds.</p>
			<p>Sitting near the window of her house, she mused, lulled by the ceaseless hum of traffic in the street below, and half dozing.</p>
			<p>The turning of the door-handle woke her from her dreams.</p>
			<p>It was Schmidt, the unspeakable Schmidt, all perspiration and excitement. His round coarse face glowed with it, and he could scarcely bring his voice to tell the news.</p>
			<p>вҖңWe have him! we have him!вҖқ he cried in glee, and snapped his fingers. вҖңOh, the good news!вҒ вҖ”I am the first! Nobody has been, Little Friend? I have run and have taken taxisвҒ вҖ”вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYou haveвҒ вҖ”whom?вҖқ she asked.</p>
			<p>вҖңThe manвҒ вҖ”one of the men,вҖқ he said, вҖңwho killed Starque and FranГ§ois, andвҒ вҖ”вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhichвҒ вҖ”which man?вҖқ she said harshly.</p>
			<p>He fumbled in his pocket and pulled out a discoloured sketch.</p>
			<p>вҖңOh!вҖқ she said, it could not be the man whom she had defied. вҖңWhy, why?вҖқ she asked stormily, вҖңwhy only this man? Why not the othersвҒ вҖ”why not the leader?вҒ вҖ”have they caught him and lost him?вҖқ</p>
			<p>Chagrin and astonishment sat on SchmidtвҖҷs round face. His disappointment was almost comic.</p>
			<p>вҖңBut, Little Mother!вҖқ he said, crestfallen and bewildered, вҖңthis is oneвҒ вҖ”we did not hope even for one andвҒ вҖ”вҖқ</p>
			<p>The storm passed over.</p>
			<p>вҖңYes, yes,вҖқ she said wearily, вҖңoneвҒ вҖ”even one is good. They shall learn that the Red Hundred can still strikeвҒ вҖ”this leader shall knowвҒ вҖ”This man shall have a death,вҖқ she said, looking at Schmidt, вҖңworthy of his importance. Tell me how he was captured.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIt was the picture,вҖқ said the eager Schmidt, вҖңthe picture you had drawn. One of our comrades thought he recognized him and followed him to his house.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHe shall be triedвҒ вҖ”tonight,вҖқ and she spent the day anticipating her triumph.</p>
			<p>Conspirators do not always choose dark arches for their plottings. The Red Hundred especially were notorious for the likeliness of their rendezvous. They went to nature for a precedent, and as she endows the tiger with stripes that are undistinguishable from the jungle grass, so the Red Hundred would choose for their meetings such a place where meetings were usually held.</p>
			<p>It was in the Lodge Room of the Pride of Millwall, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.O.S.A.</abbr>вҒ вҖ”which may be amplified as the Associated Order of the Sons of AbstinenceвҒ вҖ”that the trial took place. The financial position of the Pride of Millwall was not strong. An unusual epidemic of temperate seafaring men had called the Lodge into being, the influx of capital from eccentric bequests had built the tiny hall, and since the fiasco attending the first meeting of the League of London, much of its public business had been skilfully conducted in these riverside premises. It had been raided by the police during the days of terror, but nothing of an incriminating character had been discovered. Because of the success with which the open policy had been pursued the Woman of Gratz preferred to take the risk of an open trial in a hall liable to police raid.</p>
			<p>The man must be so guarded that escape was impossible. Messengers sped in every direction to carry out her instructions. There was a rapid summoning of leaders of the movement, the choice of the place of trial, the preparation for a ceremony which was governed by well-established precedent, and the arrangement of the properties which played so effective a part in the trials of the Hundred.</p>
			<p>In the black-draped chamber of trial the Woman of Gratz found a full company. Maliscrivona, Tchezki, Vellantini, DeВ Romans, to name a few who were there sitting altogether side by side on the low forms, and they buzzed a welcome as she walked into the room and took her seat at the higher place. She glanced round the faces, bestowing a nod here and a glance of recognition there. She remembered the last time she had made an appearance before the rank and file of the movement. She missed many faces that had turned to her in those days: Starque, FranГ§ois, KitsingerвҒ вҖ”dead at the hands of the Four Just Men. It fitted her mood to remember that tonight she would judge one who had at least helped in the slaying of Starque.</p>
			<p>Abruptly she rose. Lately she had had few opportunities for the display of that oratory which was once her sole title to consideration in the councils of the Red Hundred. Her powers of organization had come to be respected later. She felt the want of practice as she began speaking. She found herself hesitating for words, and once she felt her illustrations were crude. But she gathered confidence as she proceeded and she felt the responsive thrill of a fascinated audience.</p>
			<p>It was the story of the campaign that she told. Much of it we know; the story from the point of view of the Reds may be guessed. She finished her speech by recounting the capture of the enemy.</p>
			<p>вҖңTonight we aim a blow at these enemies of progress; if they have been merciless, let us show them that the Red Hundred is not to be outdone in ferocity. As they struck, so let us strikeвҒ вҖ”and, in striking, read a lesson to the men who killed our comrades, that they, nor the world, will ever forget.вҖқ</p>
			<p>There was no cheering as she finishedвҒ вҖ”that had been the orderвҒ вҖ”but a hum of words as they flung their tributes of words at her feetвҒ вҖ”a ruck of incoherent phrases of praise and adoration.</p>
			<p>Then two men led in the prisoner.</p>
			<p>He was calm and interested, throwing out his square chin resolutely when the first words of the charge were called and twiddling the fingers of his bound hands absently.</p>
			<p>He met the scowling faces turned to him serenely, but as they proceeded with the indictment, he grew attentive, bending his head to catch the words.</p>
			<p>Once he interrupted.</p>
			<p>вҖңI cannot quite understand that,вҖқ he said in fluent Russian, вҖңmy knowledge of German is limited.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat is your nationality?вҖқ demanded the woman.</p>
			<p>вҖңEnglish,вҖқ he replied.</p>
			<p>вҖңDo you speak French?вҖқ she asked.</p>
			<p>вҖңI am learning,вҖқ he said naively, and smiled.</p>
			<p>вҖңYou speak Russian,вҖқ she said. Her conversation was carried on in that tongue.</p>
			<p>вҖңYes,вҖқ he said simply; вҖңI was there for many years.вҖқ</p>
			<p>After this, the sum of his transgressions were pronounced in a language he understood. Once or twice as the reader proceededвҒ вҖ”it was Ivan Oranvitch who readвҒ вҖ”the man smiled.</p>
			<p>The Woman of Gratz recognized him instantly as the fourth of the party that gathered about her door the day Bartholomew was murdered. Formally she asked him what he had to say before he was condemned.</p>
			<p>He smiled again.</p>
			<p>вҖңI am not one of the Four Just Men,вҖқ he said; вҖңwhoever says I amвҒ вҖ”lies.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd is that all you have to say?вҖқ she asked scornfully.</p>
			<p>вҖңThat is all,вҖқ was his calm reply.</p>
			<p>вҖңDo you deny that you helped slay our comrade Starque?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI do not deny it,вҖқ he said easily, вҖңI did not helpвҒ вҖ”I killed him.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAh!вҖқ the exclamation came simultaneously from every throat.</p>
			<p>вҖңDo you deny that you have killed many of the Red Hundred?вҖқ</p>
			<p>He paused before he answered.</p>
			<p>вҖңAs to the Red HundredвҒ вҖ”I do not know; but I have killed many people.вҖқ He spoke with the grave air of a man filled with a sense of responsibility, and again the exclamatory hum ran through the hall. Yet, the Woman of Gratz had a growing sense of unrest in spite of the success of the examination.</p>
			<p>вҖңYou have said you were in RussiaвҒ вҖ”did men fall to your hand there?вҖқ</p>
			<p>He nodded.</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd in England?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAlso in England,вҖқ he said.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat is your name?вҖқ she asked. By an oversight it was a question she had not put before.</p>
			<p>The man shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>вҖңDoes it matter?вҖқ he asked. A thought struck her. In the hall she had seen Magnus the Jew. He had lived for many years in England, and she beckoned him.</p>
			<p>вҖңOf what class is this man?вҖқ she asked in a whisper.</p>
			<p>вҖңOf the lower orders,вҖқ he replied; вҖңit is astoundingвҒ вҖ”did you not notice whenвҒ вҖ”no, you did not see his capture. But he spoke like a man of the streets, dropping his aspirates.вҖқ</p>
			<p>He saw she looked puzzled and explained.</p>
			<p>вҖңIt is a trick of the orderвҒ вҖ”just as the Muzhik says.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ he treated her to a specimen of colloquial Russian.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat is your name?вҖқ she asked again.</p>
			<p>He looked at her slyly.</p>
			<p>вҖңIn Russia they called me Father Kopab.вҖқ<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
			<p>The majority of those who were present were Russian, and at the word they sprang to their feet, shrinking back with ashen faces, as though they feared contact with the man who stood bound and helpless in the middle of the room.</p>
			<p>The Woman of Gratz had risen with the rest. Her lips quivered and her wide open eyes spoke her momentary terror.</p>
			<p>вҖңI killed Starque,вҖқ he went on, вҖңby authority. FranГ§ois also. Some dayвҖқвҒ вҖ”he looked leisurely about the roomвҒ вҖ”вҖңI shall alsoвҒ вҖ”вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңStop!вҖқ she cried, and then:</p>
			<p>вҖңRelease him,вҖқ she said, and, wonderingly, Schmidt cut the bonds that bound him. He stretched himself.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhen you took me,вҖқ he said, вҖңI had a book; you will understand that here in England I findвҒ вҖ”forgetfulness in booksвҒ вҖ”and I, who have seen so much suffering and want caused through departure from the law, am striving as hard for the regeneration of mankind as youвҒ вҖ”but differently.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Somebody handed him a book.</p>
			<p>He looked at it, nodded, and slipped it into his pocket.</p>
			<p>вҖңFarewell,вҖқ he said as he turned to the open door.</p>
			<p>вҖңIn GodвҖҷs name!вҖқ said the Woman of Gratz, trembling, вҖңgo in peace, Little Father.вҖқ</p>
			<p>And the man Jessen, sometime headsman to the Supreme Council, and latterly public executioner of England, walked out, no man barring his exit.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The power of the Red Hundred was broken. This much Falmouth knew. He kept an ever-vigilant band of men on duty at the great termini of London, and to these were attached the members of a dozen secret police forces of Europe. Day by day, there was the same report to make. Such and such a man, whose very presence in London had been unsuspected, had left via Harwich. So-and-so, surprisingly sprung from nowhere, had gone by the eleven oвҖҷclock train from Victoria; by the Hull and Stockholm route twenty had gone in one day, and there were others who made Liverpool, Glasgow, and Newcastle their port of embarkation.</p>
			<p>I think that it was only then that Scotland Yard realized the strength of the force that had lain inert in the metropolis, or appreciated the possibilities for destruction that had been to hand in the days of the Terror.</p>
			<p>Certainly every batch of names that appeared on the commissionerвҖҷs desk made him more thoughtful than ever.</p>
			<p>вҖңArrest them!вҖқ he said in horror when the suggestion was made. вҖңArrest them! Look here, have you ever seen driver ants attack a house in Africa? Marching in, in endless battalions at midnight and clearing out everything living from chickens to beetles? Have you ever seen them reform in the morning and go marching home again? You wouldnвҖҷt think of arresting вҖҷem, would you? No, youвҖҷd just sit down quietly out of their reach and be happy when the last little red leg has disappeared round the corner!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Those who knew the Red Hundred best were heartily in accord with his philosophy.</p>
			<p>вҖңThey caught Jessen,вҖқ reported Falmouth.</p>
			<p>вҖңOh!вҖқ said the Commissioner.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhen he disclosed his identity, they got rid of him quick.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIвҖҷve often wondered why the Four Just Men didnвҖҷt do the business of Starque themselves,вҖқ mused the Commissioner.</p>
			<p>вҖңIt was rather rum,вҖқ admitted Falmouth, вҖңbut Starque was a man under sentence, as also was FranГ§ois. By some means they got hold of the original warrants, and it was on these that JessenвҒ вҖ”did what he did.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The commissioner nodded.</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd now,вҖқ he asked, вҖңwhat about them?вҖқ</p>
			<p>Falmouth had expected this question sooner or later.</p>
			<p>вҖңDo you suggest that we should catch them, sir?вҖқ he asked with thinly veiled sarcasm; вҖңbecause if you do, sir, I have only to remind you that weвҖҷve been trying to do that for some years.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The chief commissioner frowned.</p>
			<p>вҖңItвҖҷs a remarkable thing,вҖқ he said, вҖңthat as soon as we get a situation such asвҒ вҖ”the Red Hundred scare and the Four Just Men scare, for instance, weвҖҷre completely at sea, and thatвҖҷs what the papers will say. It doesnвҖҷt sound creditable, but itвҖҷs so.вҖқ</p>
			<p>I place the superintendentвҖҷs defence of Scotland Yard on record <i xml:lang="la">in extenso</i>.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat the papers say,вҖқ said Falmouth, вҖңnever keeps me awake at night. NobodyвҖҷs quite got the hang of the police force in this countryвҒ вҖ”certainly the writing people havenвҖҷt.</p>
			<p>вҖңThere are two ways of writing about the police, sir. One way is to deal with them in the newspaper fashion with the headline вҖҳAnother Police BlunderвҖҷ or вҖҳThe Police and The Public,вҖҷ and the other way is to deal with them in the magazine style, which is to show them as softies on the wrong scent, whilst an ornamental civilian is showing them their business, or as mysterious people with false beards who pop up at the psychological moment, and say, in a loud voice, вҖҳIn the name of the Law, I arrest you!вҖҷ</p>
			<p>вҖңWell, I donвҖҷt mind admitting that I know neither kind. IвҖҷve been a police officer for twenty-three years, and the only assistance IвҖҷve had from a civilian was from a man named Blackie, who helped me to find the body of a woman that had disappeared. I was rather prejudiced against him, but I donвҖҷt mind admitting that he was pretty smart and followed his clues with remarkable ingenuity.</p>
			<p>вҖңThe day we found the body I said to him:</p>
			<p>вҖңвҖҠвҖҳ<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Blackie, you have given me a great deal of information about this womanвҖҷs movementsвҒ вҖ”in fact, you know a great deal more than you ought to knowвҒ вҖ”so I shall take you into custody on the suspicion of having caused her death.вҖҷ</p>
			<p>вҖңBefore he died he made a full confession, and ever since then I have always been pleased to take as much advice and help from outside as I could get.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhen people sometimes ask me about the cleverness of Scotland Yard, I canвҖҷt tell вҖҷem tales such as you read about. IвҖҷve had murderers, anarchists, burglars, and average low-down people to deal with, but they have mostly done their work in a commonplace way and bolted. And as soon as they have bolted, weвҖҷve employed fairly commonplace methods and brought вҖҷem back.</p>
			<p>вҖңIf you ask me whether IвҖҷve been in dreadful danger, when arresting desperate murderers and criminals, I say вҖҳNo.вҖҷ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhen your average criminal finds himself cornered, he says, вҖҳAll right, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>В Falmouth; itвҖҷs a cop,вҖҷ and goes quietly.</p>
			<p>вҖңCrime and criminals run in grooves. TheyвҖҷre hardy annuals with perennial methods. Extraordinary circumstances baffle the police as they baffle other folks. You canвҖҷt run a business on business lines and be absolutely prepared for anything that turns up. WhiteleyвҖҷs will supply you with a flea or an elephant, but if a woman asked a shopgirl to hold her baby whilst she went into the tinned meat department, the girl and the manager and the whole system would be floored, because there is no provision for holding babies. And if a Manchester goods merchant, unrolling his stuff, came upon a snake lying all snug in the bale, heвҖҷd be floored too, because natural history isnвҖҷt part of their business training, and they wouldnвҖҷt be quite sure whether it was a big worm or a boa constrictor.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The Commissioner was amused.</p>
			<p>вҖңYouвҖҷve an altogether unexpected sense of humor,вҖқ he said, вҖңand the moral isвҒ вҖ”вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThat the unexpected always floors you, whether itвҖҷs humour or crime,вҖқ said Falmouth, and went away fairly pleased with himself.</p>
			<p>In his room he found a waiting messenger.</p>
			<p>вҖңA lady to see you, sir.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWho is it?вҖқ he asked in surprise.</p>
			<p>The messenger handed him a slip of paper and when he read it whistled.</p>
			<p>вҖңThe unexpected, byвҒ вҖ”! Show her up.вҖқ</p>
			<p>On the paper was writtenвҒ вҖ”вҖңThe Woman of Gratz.вҖқ</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
